Oral Features and Dentition
Oral Cavity:
Vestibule:** The space between the lips/cheeks and teeth is essential for food movement and speech.
Oral Cavity Proper:** This main area within the dental arches houses the tongue and is critical for digestion and communication.
Gingiva (Gums):
Composed of attached and interdental gingiva, the attached gingiva firmly stabilizes teeth by binding
to the bone, while interdental gingiva effectively protects spaces between teeth and enhances oral
hygiene.
Types of Teeth and Their Functions:
Incisors:** These are the forefront teeth designed specifically for cutting food (4 on top, 4 on the bottom).
Canines:** Positioned next to the incisors, these pointed teeth excel at tearing food (2 on top, 2 on bottom).
Premolars and Molars:** Located at the back, premolars are powerful for crushing and grinding (2 on
each side), while molars are larger and designed for thorough grinding, typically numbering 12, including wisdom
teeth.
Dentition Periods:
Primary Dentition:** This stage features 20 baby teeth that emerge around
six months, playing a crucial role in eating and speech development.
Mixed Dentition:** From ages 6 to 12, both primary and permanent teeth coexist, a vital phase for ensuring proper alignment.
Permanent Dentition:** By early adulthood, individuals will possess a full set of 32 permanent teeth,
engineered for lifelong use in biting and chewing, thus maintaining oral function and jaw structure.